	The space race was crucial in developing scientific and technological prowess in communities around the world. The United States and the Soviet Union were two major parties involved. Constant pressure to advance at a faster rate than other parties drove rapid innovation during this period, projecting mankind as a whole into space. However, the space race did more than just bolster space research. It improved modern society by driving innovation in the medical field, allowing efficient transportation, and creating an environment that inspires students to pursue their passion through higher education. 
	The livelihood and safety of modern society was heavily reinforced through medical innovations stemming from the space race. Engineers at the Johnson Space Center used principals from the fuel pumps of a space shuttle in order to create the Left Ventricular Assist Device (LVAD), which aids in pumping blood inside the heart. For patients in need of a heart transplant, this device is imperative in order to keep their heart functioning normally as they wait (Brinson). The invention of this device therefore saved many lives and contributed greatly to the health of modern humans. If the fuel pump which inspired LVAD was never created out of a desire for space exploration, then such an indispensable device would not have been created. Other technologies that resulted from space research include the Bio-Moniter and Bio-Analyzer, both developed by the Canadian Space Agency. The Bio-Moniter allows health metrics to be continuously tracked and recorded, and the Bio-Analyzer can run blood tests, yielding results quickly and reliably (Asrar et al.). These tools were designed to be portable and easy to live with, making it ideal for not only astronauts, but also those who live in remote areas with limited access to immediate healthcare. The resources and effort required to treat people who live far away from medical facilities becomes much less when convenient devices like these are available, bettering the overall safety of people, regardless of their proximity to formal medical institutions. Additionally, a large amount of research done on space stations helps draw conclusions about the way humans are affected by spaceflight. One such undertaking that led to the development of new medical technology is ESA EDT, which focused on the way microgravity affects humans’ ability to keep their eyes centered on a single point while their head moves around. In order to inspect the positioning of the eye during this investigation, a special eye tracking headset had to be developed (“Space Station Leads to Breakthroughs in Human Health on Earth”). This technology is now used by laser eye surgeons to track the orientation of the eye, making eye surgery easier and heavily limiting the risk involved with it. In a similar vein, IGAR, a robot produced by the Canadian Space Agency and the Centre for Surgical Innovation and Invention, was also a breakthrough in automating medical treatment. By taking advantage of the accuracy and consistency of robotic equipment, this instrument could be used to perform biopsies, and eventually lead to further innovation in the form of remote surgery (“Space Station Leads to Breakthroughs in Human Health on Earth”). By harnessing the capabilities of these tools and using space research to guide innovation, the medical field can enhance its treatment further and work along with technology to create a more prosperous future for patients. 
	With the need for efficient and reliable space travel in the space race, many improvements had to be made on old systems used for transportation. These refinements not only assisted people investigating space, but also facilitated major enhancements in the way people commute on Earth, helping connect people on a global scale. The car manufacturer Nissan took much inspiration from NASA’s research in order to perfect the structure and function of cars. It was imperative to the car company that the car seats remain comfortable and secure for long driving periods, similar in nature to the needs of an astronaut. As a result of the research, Nissan implemented their NASA-inspired seats in the 2013 Altima, with the success of the design carrying it into their other models as well (Wagner). Although comfort had already been a priority in the industry, space research helped push limits and make driving a more viable option, benefiting drivers everywhere. With aircrafts leaving and returning rapidly as space research rose, maintaining tire pressure became a major priority for NASA. This led to the creation of the first tire pressure sensors, turning pressure into electrical currents, and alerting operators when pressure drops too low. While this device proved useful to astronauts, it was also later altered to serve cars, providing the same benefits for drivers (Wagner). This technology grew in popularity so much that US law now mandates pressure gauges installed on every tire, as a means to achieving safety and reliability for drivers everywhere. With the rise of satellites also came new opportunities for quality of life features in transportation. While the Global Positioning System (GPS) was thought of as a luxury in its early years, it would soon become an essential piece of technology for many travellers. Satellites enabled accurate and efficient location tracking, benefitting not just drivers, but also offering an overhaul to the way planes, ships, and trains navigate (Wagner). GPS substantially improved navigation for humans in all mediums, permanently removing the need for external directions, and making travel easier than ever. The aviation industry is one that made major progress alongside the evolution of space technology, much of which is attributed to technology funded by NASA. The Icing Branch at their Glenn Research Center researched the effect of ice on aircraft wings and developed a new and improved method for removing it. Typically, ice is eliminated with liquid deicing systems or pneumatic boots. Both of these approaches come with major drawbacks, sacrificing effectiveness for weight or weight for effectiveness. In contrast, the graphite foil technology developed by NASA is both effective and lightweight, by heating thin graphite sheets to melt ice (Lockney). By studying more than just space, NASA helped resolve many issues in other industries, leading to the success and flourishing of society as a whole. The space race, however concerned with space, significantly improved the accessibility, fidelity, and effectiveness of transportation on Earth across multiple modes, leading to easy travel for many around the world.
	The space race included rapid advancement in technical fields, motivating many to take part in the exploration, and contributing to an overhaul in education. The Soviet Union's Sputnik Satellite launched in October of 1957, which led to panic in the United States, with doubts regarding their ability to contest the Soviets. This prompted responses from the United States seeking to accelerate progress themselves, such as the National Defence Education Act (NDEA), which encouraged higher education and more activity in the fields of mathematics, science, and engineering. The NDEA authorized loans and scholarships to allow students the opportunity to pursue a higher level of education and acquire skills that could aid in growing the space program. The act also made students familiar with new visual and audio technologies by motivating their use in teaching (Hunt). Altogether, this act invested a total of more than one billion dollars in the improvement of the schooling system, helping engage the new generation of learners and better their lives through education (Roush). Other groups contributed to the instructional framework as well, such as the National Science Foundation. In the recent years following the launch of Sputnik, the National Science Foundation allocated 500 million dollars to the evolution of teaching methods (Roush). This money helped further advance the system, achieving a higher level of acquaintance with technology that would help improve the United State’s position in the space race. Both the NDEA and the funding from the National Science Foundation quickened innovation for the space program, but it would not have been possible without the proper incentives. Educational aid was strongly opposed prior to the launch of Sputnik, with bills being rejected one after another upon reaching the House of Representatives. However, the Soviet’s progress had given senators the opportunity to paint the education bill as a matter of national security, suggesting that the amount of power conceded to the Soviets would directly depend on the quality of education that Americans received. This strategy helped propel the NDEA past the House and President, and into law (“Sputnik Spurs Passage of the National Defense Education Act”). A similar proceeding took place in the National Science Foundation, doubling the amount of money available for scientific undertaking by correlating the scientific success of the country with its security (Roush). Without the pressure of succumbing to the Soviets, many of the actions taken to strengthen the knowledge of students would not have been taken. The space race created massive opportunities for the enhancement of education by incentivising modern methods of learning, and encouraging proper funding for academic endeavors, both of which helped give knowledge and prosperity to countless people. 
	Between medical stability, reliable transportation, and transformative education, the study of space brought up modern society to a great extent. Clinical accommodations for astronauts transferred well to medical applications on Earth, while the mechanical expertise needed to get to space helped make transport easier for everyone. Additionally, competition to inhabit space earlier than others gave nations a motive to expand their research, leading to an excellent education system. The space program that is present today is continuing to push boundaries, leading to the ongoing betterment of society in the future.
